hackthology/content/papers/2017-psb.md, before:

Title: Frequent Subgraph Mining of Personalized Signaling Pathway Networks Groups Patients with Frequently Dysregulated Disease Pathways and Predicts Prognosis.
Author: Arda Durmaz, <a href="http://hackthology.com">Tim Henderson</a>, Doug Brubaker, and <a href="http://gurkan.case.edu">Gurkan Bebek</a>
Citation: A. Durmaz*, <strong>T. A. D. Henderson</strong>*, D.  Brubaker, and G. Bebek. <i>Frequent Subgraph Mining of Personalized Signaling Pathway Networks Groups Patients with Frequently Dysregulated Disease Pathways and Predicts Prognosis.</i> PSB 2017. *<strong>Co-First Author</strong>
Date: 2017-01-3
Category: Paper

A. Durmaz\*, **T. A. D. Henderson**\*, D.  Brubaker, and G. Bebek. *Frequent
Subgraph Mining of Personalized Signaling Pathway Networks Groups Patients with
Frequently Dysregulated Disease Pathways and Predicts Prognosis.*
[PSB 2017](http://psb.stanford.edu/).
[PDF]({filename}/pdfs/psb-2017.pdf).
[SUPPLEMENT]({filename}/pdfs/psb-2017-supplemental.pdf).
[WEB]({filename}/papers/2017-psb.md). <br/>
\* **Co-First Author**


### Abstract

#### Motivation

Large scale genomics studies have generated comprehensive molecular
characterization of numerous cancer types. Subtypes for many tumor types have
been established; however, these classifications are based on molecular
characteristics of a small gene sets with limited power to detect dysregulation
at the patient level.  We hypothesize that frequent graph mining of pathways to
gather pathways functionally relevant to tumors can characterize tumor types and
provide opportunities for personalized therapies.

#### Results

In this study we present an integrative omics approach to group patients based
on their altered pathway characteristics and show prognostic differences within
breast cancer (p < 9.57e-10) and glioblastoma multiforme (p < 0.05) patients. We
were able validate this approach in secondary RNA-Seq datasets with p < 0.05 and
p < 0.01 respectively. We also performed pathway enrichment analysis to further
investigate the biological relevance of dysregulated pathways. We compared our
approach with network-based classifier algorithms and showed that our
unsupervised approach generates more robust and biologically relevant clustering
whereas previous approaches failed to report specific functions for similar
patient groups or classify patients into prognostic groups.

#### Conclusions

These results could serve as a means to improve
prognosis for future cancer patients, and to provide opportunities for
improved treatment options and personalized interventions.  The proposed novel 
graph mining approach is able to integrate PPI networks 
with gene expression in a biologically sound approach and cluster patients in to
clinically distinct groups. We have utilized breast cancer and glioblastoma
multiforme datasets from microarray and RNA-Seq platforms and identified
disease mechanisms differentiating samples.

Commit message:

added iwsc paper
Signed-off-by: Tim Henderson <tim.tadh@gmail.com>

hackthology/content/papers/2017-psb.md, after:

Title: Frequent Subgraph Mining of Personalized Signaling Pathway Networks Groups Patients with Frequently Dysregulated Disease Pathways and Predicts Prognosis
Author: Arda Durmaz, <a href="http://hackthology.com">Tim Henderson</a>, Doug Brubaker, and <a href="http://gurkan.case.edu">Gurkan Bebek</a>
Citation: A. Durmaz*, <strong>T. A. D. Henderson</strong>*, D.  Brubaker, and G. Bebek. <i>Frequent Subgraph Mining of Personalized Signaling Pathway Networks Groups Patients with Frequently Dysregulated Disease Pathways and Predicts Prognosis.</i> PSB 2017. *<strong>Co-First Author</strong>
CiteAuthor: A. Durmaz*, <strong>T. A. D. Henderson</strong>*, D.  Brubaker, and G. Bebek
Publication: PSB 2017
Notes: *<strong>Co-First Author</strong>
Date: 2017-01-3
Category: Paper

A. Durmaz\*, **T. A. D. Henderson**\*, D.  Brubaker, and G. Bebek. *Frequent
Subgraph Mining of Personalized Signaling Pathway Networks Groups Patients with
Frequently Dysregulated Disease Pathways and Predicts Prognosis.*
[PSB 2017](http://psb.stanford.edu/).  \* **Co-First Author**
<br/>
[DOI](http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/9789813207813\_0038).
[PUBMED](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27896993).
[PDF]({filename}/pdfs/psb-2017.pdf).
[SUPPLEMENT]({filename}/pdfs/psb-2017-supplemental.pdf).
[WEB]({filename}/papers/2017-psb.md).

### Abstract

#### Motivation

Large scale genomics studies have generated comprehensive molecular
characterization of numerous cancer types. Subtypes for many tumor types have
been established; however, these classifications are based on molecular
characteristics of a small gene sets with limited power to detect dysregulation
at the patient level.  We hypothesize that frequent graph mining of pathways to
gather pathways functionally relevant to tumors can characterize tumor types and
provide opportunities for personalized therapies.

#### Results

In this study we present an integrative omics approach to group patients based
on their altered pathway characteristics and show prognostic differences within
breast cancer (p < 9.57e-10) and glioblastoma multiforme (p < 0.05) patients. We
were able validate this approach in secondary RNA-Seq datasets with p < 0.05 and
p < 0.01 respectively. We also performed pathway enrichment analysis to further
investigate the biological relevance of dysregulated pathways. We compared our
approach with network-based classifier algorithms and showed that our
unsupervised approach generates more robust and biologically relevant clustering
whereas previous approaches failed to report specific functions for similar
patient groups or classify patients into prognostic groups.

#### Conclusions

These results could serve as a means to improve
prognosis for future cancer patients, and to provide opportunities for
improved treatment options and personalized interventions.  The proposed novel 
graph mining approach is able to integrate PPI networks 
with gene expression in a biologically sound approach and cluster patients in to
clinically distinct groups. We have utilized breast cancer and glioblastoma
multiforme datasets from microarray and RNA-Seq platforms and identified
disease mechanisms differentiating samples.


#### Note
See the [PDF]({filename}/pdfs/psb-2017.pdf) for the complete paper. Follow the
[DOI](http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/9789813207813\_0038) for the authoritative
version.
