Title: SafeRevert: When Can Breaking Changes be Automatically Reverted?
Author: <a href="http://hackthology.com">Tim Henderson</a>,  Avi Kondareddy, Sushmita Azad, Eric Nickell
Citation: <strong>Tim A. D. Henderson</strong>, Avi Kondareddy, Sushmita Azad, and Eric Nickell. <i>SafeRevert: When Can Breaking Changes be Automatically Reverted?</i>. ICST Industry Track 2024.
CiteAuthor: <strong>Tim A. D. Henderson</strong>, Avi Kondareddy, Sushmita Azad, Eric Nickell
Publication: ICST Industry Track 2024
Date: 2024-05-27
Category: Paper
MainPage: show

**Tim A. D. Henderson**, Avi Kondareddy, Sushmita Azad, and Eric Nickell.
*SafeRevert: When Can Breaking Changes be Automatically Reverted?*.  [ICST Industry Track 2024](https://conf.researchr.org/details/icst-2024/icst-2024-industry/7/SafeRevert-When-Can-Breaking-Changes-be-Automatically-Reverted-).
<br/>
[DOI](http://tba).
[PDF]({static}/pdfs/icst-2024.pdf).
[WEB]({filename}/papers/2024-icst.md).
[Google Research Preprint](http://tba).

<h4>Note</h4>
> This is a conversion from a latex paper I wrote. If you want all formatting
> correct you should read the
> [pdf version]({static}/pdfs/icst-2024.pdf).

#### Abstract

When bugs or defects are introduced into a large scale software repository,
they reduce productivity. Programmers working on related areas of the code
will encounter test failures, compile breakages, or other anomalous behavior.
On encountering these issues, they will need to troubleshoot and determine
that their changes were not the cause of the error and that another change is
at fault. They must then find that change and *revert it* to return the
repository to a healthy state. In the past, our group has identified ways to
identify the root cause (or culprit) change that introduced a test failure
even when the test is flaky. This paper focuses on a related issue: at what
point does the Continuous Integration system have enough evidence to support
*automatically reverting a change*? We will motivate the problem, provide
several methods to address it, and empirically evaluate our solution on a
large set (25,137) of real-world breaking changes that occurred at
Google. SafeRevert improved recall (number of changes recommend for reversion)
by 2x over the baseline method while meeting our safety criterion.

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/latest.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>
