hackthology/content/blog/ternary-search-tries-for-fast-flexible-string.md, before:

Title: Ternary Search Tries for Fast Flexible String Search : Part 1
Author: Tim Henderson
Date: 2011-06-2
Category: Blog


Searching a large corpus of strings is a problem many applications have
to solve, whether the application features autocomplete boxes or
full-text search. Efficient methods for conducting such searches are not
always readily apparent to the algorithm designer. In this series of
articles I will present a data structure known as the Ternary Search
Trie (TST) which is designed to assist in solving this problem. For this
introductory article I will not discuss algorithms in detail but only
provide a high level overview of the structure and algorithmic running
time for various operations. In the next article I will detail the
process of maintaining the structure with insertions and deletions. The
final article will discuss different flexible search algorithms and
their implementations.

Symbol Tables: A Short Review
-----------------------------

A symbol table is a mapping between a string key and a value which can
be any type of object from an integer to a complex nested structure.
There are two classic symbol table implementations most programmers are
immediately familiar with: Binary Search Trees (BSTs) and hash tables.
Both of these structures work by exactly matching the search key to the
keys stored in the structure. If there does not exist an exact match
then there is a miss. Thus, neither of these structures can serve as
useful index for an autocomplete algorithm where only part of the key is
known. They may be useful for a full text index, but they will not be as
efficient as some of the other structures we will later discuss.

While these simple structures are limited, other symbol table
implementations have properties more suited for modification for
flexible string search. This series will focus on the Trie category of
structures. These structures are more suited for partial match as we
will see. But first, why are hash tables not suited for this job? They
have such excellent running time characteristics, O(1) lookups! However,
one cannot modify the hash table algorithm to effectively serve the
purpose of a partial match or a range query. Why? Because hash functions
transform strings into numbers (which correspond to buckets in an
array). Good hash functions have wide variance in hashing strings and
will not hash a similar string or a sub string to the same bucket.

Introducing the Trie
--------------------

![Example Binary Search Trie](/images/Trie1.png)

Figure 1. **An Example Binary Search Trie**

In general a Trie is a special for of a tree. However, instead of
comparing entire key at each node during traversal, it only compares
parts of keys. The key/value pairs are kept in the leaves (like in a B+
Tree). We will first consider a Binary Search Trie. Like the Binary
Search Tree, each node in the Trie has two children, left and right. The
left child is defined as the 0'' child and the right as the 1'' child.
As a key is inserted, a node is created or visited for each bit in the
key. When visiting a node which already exists, the direction to descend
is based on the current bit. that is:

-   let there be a function bit(i, s) which returns the ith bit in the
    string s.
-   let depth(r, n) return the depth of the node n in the tree rooted at
    r
-   bit(depth(r, n), s) is the bit in the string used to make the
    decision on which of n's children to visit.

Sedgewick gives the formal definition: "A [binary search] trie is a
binary tree that has keys associated with each of its leaves, defined
recursively as follows: The trie for an empty set of keys is a null
link; the trie for a single key is a leaf containing that key; and the
trie for a set of keys of cardinality greater than one is an internal
node with left link referring to the trie for the keys whose initial bit
is 0 and right link referring to the trie for the keys whose initial bit
is 1, with the leading bit considered to be removed for the purpose of
constructing the subtrees."[^1]

A search using this structure is directed by the strings in the
database. However, since only one bit is considered at a time in the
search for a k-bit string the search will take in the worst case k bit
comparisons. This makes for a very tall structure when using string
keys, since single characters will be at least 8 bits long in ASCII and
much longer in Unicode. Another unfortunate implementation detail is
that modern processors typically work more efficiently when accessing
bytes or words. Thus, a more efficient structure might consider multiple
bits at once.

Multi-way Tries
---------------

![Example R-Way Trie](/images/Trie2.png)

Figure 2. **An Example R-Way Trie**

If one considers multiple bits at once one has to increase the fanout
(number of children per node) of the tree. Consider figure 2, in which
each node has a fanout of 26.[^2] While useful if every
node has 26 children, the space to store the pointers becomes wasteful
for real data. However, despite the wasted space in comparison to the
binary version, searches on the R-Way Trie will perform faster than on
the Binary Trie. It will be faster for the CPU to compare the bytes
under consideration and there will be fewer comparisons over all. In
general, a Binary Trie will require log~2~(N) comparisons to perform a
search, and an R-way Trie it will take log~R~(N) comparisons.

 

However, to produce a usable structure for our purpose (a large
in-memory string index) we need to cut down on the space wasted by the
extra pointers in each node. The tricky bit is to do this while still
maintaining the hard-fought gains in search speed. Simply using a
dynamic structure like a hash table in each node to hold the array won't
work either because hash tables are slower than an array access and if
the hash table becomes overly full it may actually use more space than
the array. Thus, a different structure is needed.

Ternary Search Tries
--------------------

![Example Ternary Search Trie](/images/TST1.png)

Figure 3. **An Example Ternary Search Trie** with strings [abc, abs,
awe, and].

The Ternary Search Trie helps avoid the unnecessary space needed by a
traditional multi-way trie while still maintaining many of its
advantages. In a Ternary Search Trie each node contains a character and
three pointers. The pointers correspond to the current character under
consideration being less than, greater than or equal to the character
held by the node. In a sense this structure is like taking the Multi-way
Trie and encoding it on to a Binary Search Tree with the keys as current
character and the values as another BST corresponding to the next
character.

While a Multi-way Trie has about R\*N/log~2~(R) pointers, a Ternary
Search Trie has R + c\*N pointers where c is a small constant, perhaps
3. Consider the graph of their performance:

![Multi-way Trie vs. Ternary Search Trie](/images/Multiway_vs_Trie.gif)

Figure 4. **Links in a Multi-way Trie vs. a Ternary Search Trie**

When R is small, 2, 3, 4 Multi-way Tries and Ternary Tries have similar
a similar number of pointers, but a low branching factor destroys the
advantage of the Multi-way Trie. When R grows to a larger, more
reasonable size such as 256, the number of pointers explodes in
comparison to the Ternary Trie. Thus, the Ternary formulation will be
far more space efficient in the worst case than the Multi-way
formulation.

What is the cost for better space efficiency? In the Multi-way Trie we
must traverse at most the length of the search key links. In a TST we
may need to traverse up to 3 times that many links in the worst case.
However, this pathological case is rare. In the average case the
situation can be made much better through a few small improvements to
the basic structure.

![An Improved Ternary Search Trie](/images/TST2.png)

Figure 5. **An Improved Ternary Search Trie**.

The first improvement, illustrated below in Figure 5, involves
collapsing the leaf nodes. Instead of allowing long chains of nodes at
the leaves, we collapse them into a single node. This allows the final
check to be computed efficiently.

The second improvement, also illustrated in Figure 5, combines the best
of the Multi-way Search Trie with the Ternary Search Trie. The root node
is an R-Way node like in the Multi-way Search Trie. The rest of the tree
is a Ternary Search Trie with the leaf nodes collapsed. In practice
these improvements result in an enormous speedup. The theory also
supports the practice; according to Sedgewick, these improvements cut
the number of comparisons needed in half.[^3]

There is one final improvement to consider not shown the above figure.
Similar to the first improvement, it involves collapsing nodes, but
instead of collapsing leaf nodes, internal nodes are collapsed. This
idea is similar to the Patricia Trie. When a group of strings shares the
same contiguous substring, instead of having a node for each character
shared, collapse the shared nodes into a single node.

Conclusion and Whats Next
=========================

In this post we discussed the theory behind Symbol Tables and the use of
Tries as a symbol table implementation. The Trie, and in particular the
TST, is an efficient way to implement a symbol table. A good
implementation of a TST has comparable performance to a Hash Table.
However, as we will see in the next post they allow much more flexible
search operations. Stay tuned.

 

[^1]:  Sedgewick R. *Algorithms*. Third Edition. Definition 15.1.  [](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0201314525/)[http://www.amazon.com/dp/0201314525/](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0201314525/) Hereafter: *Sedgewick* 

[^2]: Note: Usually an R-Way or Multi-Way Trie has a fanout equal to the numbers of characters in the character set or the number of bits in a machine word, half word or byte. So in practice a node in an R-Way Trie might have 256 children or perhaps 2\^16 children. As the fanout (the number of children per node) increases the space efficiency of the Trie decreases. However, the search speed increases. A classic time/space trace off.

[^3]:  *Sedgewick* Table 15.2 and related text.

Commit message:

added TST implementation links
Signed-off-by: Tim Henderson <tim.tadh@gmail.com>

hackthology/content/blog/ternary-search-tries-for-fast-flexible-string.md, after:

Title: Ternary Search Tries for Fast Flexible String Search : Part 1
Author: Tim Henderson
Date: 2011-06-2
Category: Blog


Searching a large corpus of strings is a problem many applications have
to solve, whether the application features autocomplete boxes or
full-text search. Efficient methods for conducting such searches are not
always readily apparent to the algorithm designer. In this series of
articles I will present a data structure known as the Ternary Search
Trie (TST) which is designed to assist in solving this problem. For this
introductory article I will not discuss algorithms in detail but only
provide a high level overview of the structure and algorithmic running
time for various operations. In the next article I will detail the
process of maintaining the structure with insertions and deletions. The
final article will discuss different flexible search algorithms and
their implementations.

Symbol Tables: A Short Review
-----------------------------

A symbol table is a mapping between a string key and a value which can
be any type of object from an integer to a complex nested structure.
There are two classic symbol table implementations most programmers are
immediately familiar with: Binary Search Trees (BSTs) and hash tables.
Both of these structures work by exactly matching the search key to the
keys stored in the structure. If there does not exist an exact match
then there is a miss. Thus, neither of these structures can serve as
useful index for an autocomplete algorithm where only part of the key is
known. They may be useful for a full text index, but they will not be as
efficient as some of the other structures we will later discuss.

While these simple structures are limited, other symbol table
implementations have properties more suited for modification for
flexible string search. This series will focus on the Trie category of
structures. These structures are more suited for partial match as we
will see. But first, why are hash tables not suited for this job? They
have such excellent running time characteristics, O(1) lookups! However,
one cannot modify the hash table algorithm to effectively serve the
purpose of a partial match or a range query. Why? Because hash functions
transform strings into numbers (which correspond to buckets in an
array). Good hash functions have wide variance in hashing strings and
will not hash a similar string or a sub string to the same bucket.

Introducing the Trie
--------------------

![Example Binary Search Trie](/images/Trie1.png)

Figure 1. **An Example Binary Search Trie**

In general a Trie is a special for of a tree. However, instead of
comparing entire key at each node during traversal, it only compares
parts of keys. The key/value pairs are kept in the leaves (like in a B+
Tree). We will first consider a Binary Search Trie. Like the Binary
Search Tree, each node in the Trie has two children, left and right. The
left child is defined as the 0'' child and the right as the 1'' child.
As a key is inserted, a node is created or visited for each bit in the
key. When visiting a node which already exists, the direction to descend
is based on the current bit. that is:

-   let there be a function bit(i, s) which returns the ith bit in the
    string s.
-   let depth(r, n) return the depth of the node n in the tree rooted at
    r
-   bit(depth(r, n), s) is the bit in the string used to make the
    decision on which of n's children to visit.

Sedgewick gives the formal definition: "A [binary search] trie is a
binary tree that has keys associated with each of its leaves, defined
recursively as follows: The trie for an empty set of keys is a null
link; the trie for a single key is a leaf containing that key; and the
trie for a set of keys of cardinality greater than one is an internal
node with left link referring to the trie for the keys whose initial bit
is 0 and right link referring to the trie for the keys whose initial bit
is 1, with the leading bit considered to be removed for the purpose of
constructing the subtrees."[^1]

A search using this structure is directed by the strings in the
database. However, since only one bit is considered at a time in the
search for a k-bit string the search will take in the worst case k bit
comparisons. This makes for a very tall structure when using string
keys, since single characters will be at least 8 bits long in ASCII and
much longer in Unicode. Another unfortunate implementation detail is
that modern processors typically work more efficiently when accessing
bytes or words. Thus, a more efficient structure might consider multiple
bits at once.

Multi-way Tries
---------------

![Example R-Way Trie](/images/Trie2.png)

Figure 2. **An Example R-Way Trie**

If one considers multiple bits at once one has to increase the fanout
(number of children per node) of the tree. Consider figure 2, in which
each node has a fanout of 26.[^2] While useful if every
node has 26 children, the space to store the pointers becomes wasteful
for real data. However, despite the wasted space in comparison to the
binary version, searches on the R-Way Trie will perform faster than on
the Binary Trie. It will be faster for the CPU to compare the bytes
under consideration and there will be fewer comparisons over all. In
general, a Binary Trie will require log~2~(N) comparisons to perform a
search, and an R-way Trie it will take log~R~(N) comparisons.

 

However, to produce a usable structure for our purpose (a large
in-memory string index) we need to cut down on the space wasted by the
extra pointers in each node. The tricky bit is to do this while still
maintaining the hard-fought gains in search speed. Simply using a
dynamic structure like a hash table in each node to hold the array won't
work either because hash tables are slower than an array access and if
the hash table becomes overly full it may actually use more space than
the array. Thus, a different structure is needed.

Ternary Search Tries
--------------------

![Example Ternary Search Trie](/images/TST1.png)

Figure 3. **An Example Ternary Search Trie** with strings [abc, abs,
awe, and].

The Ternary Search Trie helps avoid the unnecessary space needed by a
traditional multi-way trie while still maintaining many of its
advantages. In a Ternary Search Trie each node contains a character and
three pointers. The pointers correspond to the current character under
consideration being less than, greater than or equal to the character
held by the node. In a sense this structure is like taking the Multi-way
Trie and encoding it on to a Binary Search Tree with the keys as current
character and the values as another BST corresponding to the next
character.

While a Multi-way Trie has about R\*N/log~2~(R) pointers, a Ternary
Search Trie has R + c\*N pointers where c is a small constant, perhaps
3. Consider the graph of their performance:

![Multi-way Trie vs. Ternary Search Trie](/images/Multiway_vs_Trie.gif)

Figure 4. **Links in a Multi-way Trie vs. a Ternary Search Trie**

When R is small, 2, 3, 4 Multi-way Tries and Ternary Tries have similar
a similar number of pointers, but a low branching factor destroys the
advantage of the Multi-way Trie. When R grows to a larger, more
reasonable size such as 256, the number of pointers explodes in
comparison to the Ternary Trie. Thus, the Ternary formulation will be
far more space efficient in the worst case than the Multi-way
formulation.

What is the cost for better space efficiency? In the Multi-way Trie we
must traverse at most the length of the search key links. In a TST we
may need to traverse up to 3 times that many links in the worst case.
However, this pathological case is rare. In the average case the
situation can be made much better through a few small improvements to
the basic structure.

![An Improved Ternary Search Trie](/images/TST2.png)

Figure 5. **An Improved Ternary Search Trie**.

The first improvement, illustrated below in Figure 5, involves
collapsing the leaf nodes. Instead of allowing long chains of nodes at
the leaves, we collapse them into a single node. This allows the final
check to be computed efficiently.

The second improvement, also illustrated in Figure 5, combines the best
of the Multi-way Search Trie with the Ternary Search Trie. The root node
is an R-Way node like in the Multi-way Search Trie. The rest of the tree
is a Ternary Search Trie with the leaf nodes collapsed. In practice
these improvements result in an enormous speedup. The theory also
supports the practice; according to Sedgewick, these improvements cut
the number of comparisons needed in half.[^3]

There is one final improvement to consider not shown the above figure.
Similar to the first improvement, it involves collapsing nodes, but
instead of collapsing leaf nodes, internal nodes are collapsed. This
idea is similar to the Patricia Trie. When a group of strings shares the
same contiguous substring, instead of having a node for each character
shared, collapse the shared nodes into a single node.

Conclusion and Whats Next
=========================

In this post we discussed the theory behind Symbol Tables and the use of
Tries as a symbol table implementation. The Trie, and in particular the
TST, is an efficient way to implement a symbol table. A good
implementation of a TST has comparable performance to a Hash Table.

You can puruse my Go (golang)
[implementation](https://github.com/timtadh/data-structures/tree/master/trie)
in
my [data-structures](http://hackthology.com/data-structures) repository. I also
wrote a [python implementation](https://github.com/timtadh/tst).

 

[^1]:  Sedgewick R. *Algorithms*. Third Edition. Definition 15.1.  [](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0201314525/)[http://www.amazon.com/dp/0201314525/](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0201314525/) Hereafter: *Sedgewick* 

[^2]: Note: Usually an R-Way or Multi-Way Trie has a fanout equal to the numbers of characters in the character set or the number of bits in a machine word, half word or byte. So in practice a node in an R-Way Trie might have 256 children or perhaps 2\^16 children. As the fanout (the number of children per node) increases the space efficiency of the Trie decreases. However, the search speed increases. A classic time/space trace off.

[^3]:  *Sedgewick* Table 15.2 and related text.
